Power of the Powerless
Topics and styles of writing change frequently in response to ongoing events or changes in society. Many authors in the mid-20th century focused on the ideas of modernism and human rights. However, the increased attention pertaining to these topics was not spontaneous. The world had just experienced a period of war and turmoil caused by an oppressive force, Nazi Germany, which eliminated basic human rights and committed genocide in order to impose their racist and immoral policies. One author, Theodore Geisel, best known as Dr. Seuss, would express his opinions on these horrible policies. Geisel’s children’s novel Yertle the Turtle portrays the author’s moralistic and liberalistic views on how absolute power can negatively impact human rights through the use of anapestic tetrameter along with symbolistic dialogue between the ruler, “Yertle,” and his subjects, the turtles.
All of Geisel’s life accomplishments and beginnings are diverse and intriguing, which is exemplified with details of his personal background, career interests, and writing styles. The beginning of these accomplishments and pursuits would begin in his early life. Theodore Geisel had begun to show an interest in literature at a young age, which he attributes to his mother’s readings of poetry when he was a youth (Dr. Seuss Enterprises, 2004). This would carry on into his adult years, where he would write in several magazines and mediums of media (Dr. Seuss Enterprises, 2004). Eventually, he attended college at Oxford University in England, but abandoned his academics there to tour Europe and teach himself literature (Dr. Seuss Enterprises, 2004). This introduction to writing at an early age along with the opportunities presented to him gave him a good start in his literary pursuits. However, Geisel did not always take advantage of these offers. As stated by Dr. Seuss Enterprises, “To please his father, who wanted him to be a college professor, Ted went on to Oxford University in England after graduation. However, his academic studies bored him, and he decided to tour Europe instead.” (Dr. Seuss Enterprises, 2004). This decision to abandon his studies in favor of personal desires was a major turning point in Geisel’s life, as his education would begin to depend primarily on personal experience.
Geisel had been majorly influenced by his early and later life experiences; with his political, social, and literary views being formed during these times. Yertle the Turtle shows Geisel’s political and social views, where he explores the effects of abusive power on the people it rules over. As Pease says, Dr. Seuss portrays his views on social and political hierarchy during the Cold War in Yertle the Turtle and Other Stories (Pease, 2010). His pursuit of a literary career had also been supported by his father and mother in particular. His active relationship with his father led forward in his passion for writing, as strong father-son bonds made his childhood a comfortable and delightful one. Geisel established a strong relationship with his father, and attempted to participate in sport related activities for him (Morgan, 1995). He would also visit the park, travel, and enjoy other recreational activities with his father, but stuck to his dream of a literary career (Morgan, 1995). These life experiences would drive Geisel to move forward to accomplish his dreams and eventually express his concerns for human rights in Yertle the Turtle.
As more prominent social alterations and ideas appeared, Geisel would respond by using symbolism, figurative language, and rhyming schemes to elaborate on them in his works, both illustrated and written. One prominent example of this was when Geisel presented his disapproval to Hitler’s policies through both illustrations and writing. Best said by Morgan, “But Ted’s ultimate scorn was aimed at Adolf Hitler, whom he drew for PM [A liberal newspaper Geisel drew political comics for] as an arrogant, incorrigible infant in diapers.” (Morgan, 1995). This was an accurate symbolistic portrayal because of Hitler’s intolerance to other ideas and his reaction to them as well. After Geisel had moved on from magazines and illustrations to his own works in children’s literature, he began to explore more social events. Two invariant themes of Dr. Seuss’s beast books; the reversibility of power and the need for communal independence, are seen portrayed in Yertle the Turtle, with Yertle’s power over the least empowered of his subjects (Pease, 2010). This trend of following the affairs of society and government would continue in all of his works to come, using figurative language, symbolism, rhyming schemes, and even illustrations in his children books.
The use of figurative language, symbolism, rhyming schemes, and word patterns is prominent throughout all of Geisel’s works and creates a unique tone to his writing. Not all of Geisel’s writings were strict and based solely on his personal opinions. Creativity, fun, and childish perspectives were the key to Geisel’s success in the world of literature. “’But that isn't all.  I'll do better than that! [Better than the height of his current throne] My throne shall be higher!’ his royal voice thundered, ‘So pile up more turtles! I want 'bout two hundred!’" (Seuss, 1958). This shows his use of anapestic tetrameter, which was his primary rhyming scheme for most of his works. Reading it sounds steady and soothing, with the words hopping from left to right in a steady beat. “After King Yertle refuses to recognize the other turtles’ right to live without the pain and hunger brought on by his oppressive order, Mack’s body give the biopolitical expression to his distress: ‘He burped!’” (Pease, 2010). Even with such a serious meaning behind this, Geisel uses a frivolous expression to symbolize it. These unique aspects made his writing special from every other authors.
Geisel’s life was signified by his early interests in literature, time writing for newspapers and magazines, skipping college in favor for exploration around Europe and self-taught ideas, and several famous children books that would mark him in history as a creative, informative, and well-minded person. His writings and illustrations were always rich in rhyming, figurative language, symbolism, and new, funny dialogue that was just for children. Works that he created, either for children or newspapers, would always have a political or social meaning behind it that gave a deeper meaning for the reader to interpret. One of Geisel’s most popular works, Yertle the Turtle, shows all of these aspects come together, which portrays how an oppressive power can negatively impact human rights with the use of symbolism between Yertle, the oppressive ruler of a society, and the turtles, the people of that society, to show what Hitler’s reign was like in Nazi Germany.
